
Perhaps the most straightforward explanation of language development is that it occurs through
principles of learning, including association, reinforcement, and the observation of others (Skinner,
1965). There must be at least some truth to the idea that language is learned, because children learn the
language that they hear spoken around them rather than some other language. Also supporting this idea
is the gradual improvement of language skills with time. It seems that children modify their language
through imitation, reinforcement, and shaping, as would be predicted by learning theories.

But language cannot be entirely learned. For one, children learn words too fast for them to be learned
through reinforcement. Between the ages of 18 months and 5 years, children learn up to 10 new
words every day (Anglin, 1993). More importantly, language is more generative than it is imitative.
Generativity refers to the fact that speakers of a language can compose sentences to represent new ideas
that they have never before been exposed to. Language is not a predefined set of ideas and sentences that
we choose when we need them, but rather a system of rules and procedures that allows us to create an
infinite number of statements, thoughts, and ideas, including those that have never previously occurred.

Other evidence that refutes the idea that all language is learned through experience comes from the
observation that children may learn languages better than they ever hear them. Deaf children whose
parents do not speak ASL very well nevertheless are able to learn it perfectly on their own, and may
even make up their own language if they need to (Goldin-Meadow & Mylander, 1998). A group of
deaf children in a school in Nicaragua, whose teachers could not sign, invented a way to communicate
through made-up signs (Senghas, Senghas, & Pyers, 2005). The development of this new Nicaraguan
Sign Language has continued and changed as new generations of students have come to the school and
started using the language. Although the original system was not a real language, it is becoming closer
and closer every year, showing the development of a new language in modern times.

The linguist Noam Chomsky is a believer in the nature approach to language, arguing that human
brains contain a language acquisition device that includes a universal grammar that underlies all human
language (Chomsky, 1965, 1972). According to this approach, each of the many languages spoken
around the world (there are between 6,000 and 8,000) is an individual example of the same underlying
set of procedures that are hardwired into human brains. Chomsky’s account proposes that children are
born with a knowledge of general rules of syntax that determine how sentences are constructed.

Chomsky differentiates between the deep structure of an idea—how the idea is represented in the
fundamental universal grammar that is common to all languages, and the surface structure of the
idea—how it is expressed in any one language. Once we hear or express a thought in surface structure,
we generally forget exactly how it happened. At the end of a lecture, you will remember a lot of the deep
structure (i.e., the ideas expressed by the instructor), but you cannot reproduce the surface structure (the
exact words that the instructor used to communicate the ideas).
