Also talk about -
1. Habituation
2. Classical conditioning
3. Operant condiotioning

Social Competence: Responding to Others
Soon after Kaita was born, her older brother looked down at her in her crib and opened his
mouth wide, pretending to be surprised. Kaita’s mother, looking on, was amazed when it ap-
peared that Kaita imitated his expression, opening her mouth as if she were surprised.
Was Kaita’s response a happy coincidence or a true imitation of her brother’s expression?
Although infants were known to have all the muscles in place to produce facial expressions
related to basic emotions, the actual appearance of such expressions was assumed to be largely
random. However, research beginning in the late 1970s suggested a different conclusion. For in-
stance, developmental researchers found that when an adult modeled a behavior that the infant
already performed spontaneously, such as opening the mouth or sticking out the tongue, the
newborn appeared to imitate the behavior (Meltzoff & Moore, 1977, 2002; Nagy, 2006).
Even more exciting were findings from a series of studies conducted by developmen-
tal psychologist Tiffany Field and her colleagues (Field, 1982; Field & Walden, 1982; Field
et al., 1984). They initially showed that infants could discriminate among such basic facial
expressions as happiness, sadness, and surprise. They then exposed newborns to an adult
model with a happy, sad, or surprised facial expression. The results suggested that newborns
produced a reasonably accurate imitation of the adult’s expression.
However, subsequent research seemed to point to a different conclusion, as other in-
vestigators found consistent evidence only for a single imitative movement: sticking out the
tongue. And even that response seemed to disappear around the age of two months. Because
it seems unlikely that imitation would be limited to a single gesture and only appear for a
few months, some researchers began to question the earlier findings. In fact, some research-
ers suggested that even sticking out the tongue was not imitation, but merely an exploratory
behavior (Jones, 2006; 2007; Tissaw, 2007; Simcock, Garrity, & Barr, 2011).
The jury is still out on exactly when true imitation begins, although it seems clear that some
forms of imitation begin very early in life. Such imitative skills are important, because effective
social interaction with others relies in part on the ability to react to other people in an appropri-
ate manner and to understand the meaning of others’ emotional states. Consequently, newborns’
ability to imitate provides them with an important foundation for social interaction later in life
(Rogers & Williams, 2006; Zeedyk & Heimann, 2006; Legerstee & Markova, 2008).
Several other aspects of newborns’ behavior also act as forerunners for more formal types
of social interaction that they will develop as they grow. As shown in Table 4-6, certain charac-
teristics of neonates mesh with parental behavior to help produce a social relationship between
child and parent, as well as social relationships with others (Eckerman & Oehler, 1992).
For example, newborns cycle through various states of arousal, different degrees of
sleep and wakefulness, ranging from deep sleep to great agitation. Although these cycles are
disrupted immediately after birth, they quickly become more regularized. Caregivers become
involved when they seek to aid the infant in transitions from one state to another. For instance,
a father who rhythmically rocks his crying daughter in an effort to calm her is engaged in a
joint activity that is a prelude to future social interactions of different sorts. Similarly, new-
borns tend to pay particular attention to their mothers’ voices. In turn, parents and others
modify their speech when talking to infants, using a different pitch and tempo than they use
with older children and adults (De Casper & Fifer, 1980; Smith & Trainor, 2008; Barr, 2011;
Morgan, Horn, & Bergman, 2011).

The ultimate outcome of the social interactive capabilities of the newborn infant, and the
responses such behavior brings from parents, is to pave the way for future social interactions.
Just as the neonate shows remarkable skills on a physical and perceptual level, its social capa-
bilities are no less sophisticated.
