Like Tamera Dixon, whose birth was described in the chapter prologue, 11% of infants are
born earlier than normal. Preterm infants, or premature infants, are born prior to 38 weeks
after conception. Because they have not had time to develop fully as fetuses, preterm infants
are at high risk for illness and death.
The extent of danger faced by preterm babies largely depends on the child’s weight at
birth, which has great significance as an indicator of the extent of the baby’s ­development.
Although the average newborn weighs around 3,400 grams (about 7½ pounds), low-­
birthweight infants weigh less than 2,500 grams (around 5½ pounds). Although only 7% of
all newborns in the United States fall into the low-birthweight category, they account for the
majority of newborn deaths (DeVader et al., 2007).
Although most low-birthweight infants are preterm, some are small-for-gestational-age
babies. Small-for-gestational-age infants are infants who, because of delayed fetal growth,
weigh 90% (or less) of the average weight of infants of the same gestational age. Small-for-
gestational-age infants are sometimes also preterm, but may not be. The syndrome may be
caused by inadequate nutrition during pregnancy (Bergmann, Bergmann, & Dudenhausen,
2008; Lyndsay et al., 2011).
If the degree of prematurity is not too great and weight at birth is not extremely low, the
threat to the child’s well-being is relatively minor. In such cases, the main treatment may
be to keep the baby in the hospital to gain weight. Additional weight is critical because fat
layers help prevent chilling in neonates, who are not particularly efficient at regulating body
temperature.
Newborns who are born more prematurely and who have birthweights significantly be-
low average face a tougher road. For them, simply staying alive is a major task. For in-
stance, low-birthweight infants are highly vulnerable to infection, and because their lungs
have not had time to fully develop, they have problems taking in sufficient oxygen. As a con-
sequence, they may experience respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), with potentially fatal
consequences.

To deal with respiratory distress syndrome, low-­
birthweight infants are often placed in incubators,
­enclosures in which temperature and oxygen content are
controlled. The exact amount of oxygen is carefully moni-
tored. Too low a concentration of oxygen will not provide
relief, and too high a concentration can damage the delicate
retinas of the eyes, leading to permanent blindness.
The immature development of preterm neonates makes
them unusually sensitive to stimuli in their environment.
They can easily be overwhelmed by the sights, sounds, and
sensations they experience, and their breathing may be in-
terrupted or their heart rates may slow. They are often un-
able to move smoothly; their arm and leg movements are
uncoordinated, causing them to jerk about and appear star-
tled. Such behavior is quite disconcerting to parents (Miles
et al., 2006).
Despite the difficulties they experience at birth, the ma-
jority of preterm infants develop normally in the long run.
However, the tempo of development often proceeds more
slowly for preterm children compared to children born at
full term, and more subtle problems may emerge later. For
example, by the end of their first year, only 10% of pre-
maturely born infants display significant problems, and
only 5% are seriously disabled. By the age of 6, however,
approximately 38% have mild problems that call for spe-
cial educational interventions. For instance, some preterm
children show learning disabilities, behavior disorders, or
lower-than-average IQ scores. Others have difficulties with
physical coordination. Still, around 60% of preterm infants
are free of even minor problems (Dombrowski, Noonan, &
Martin, 2007; Hall et al., 2008; Grönqvist, Brodd, & von
Hofsten, 2011).

Very-Low-Birthweight Infants: The Smallest of
the Small. The story is less positive for the most ex-
treme cases of prematurity—very-low-birthweight infants.
Very-low-birthweight infants weigh less than 1250 grams
(around 2¼ pounds) or, regardless of weight, have been in
the womb less than 30 weeks.
Very-low-birthweight infants not only are tiny—some,
like little Hattie Thatcher, fitting easily in the palm of the hand at birth—they hardly seem
to belong to the same species as full-term newborns. Their eyes may be fused shut and their
earlobes may look like flaps of skin on the sides of their heads. Their skin is a darkened red
color, whatever their race.
Very-low-birthweight babies are in grave danger from the moment they are born, due to
the immaturity of their organ systems. Before the mid-1980s, these babies would not have
survived outside their mothers’ wombs. However, medical advances have led to a higher
chance of survival, pushing the age of viability, the point at which an infant can survive pre-
maturely, to about 22 weeks—some four months earlier than the term of a normal delivery.
Of course, the longer the period of development beyond conception, the higher are a new-
born’s chances of survival. A baby born earlier than 25 weeks has less than a 50-50 chance of
survival (see Figure 4-3 on page 108).
The physical and cognitive problems experienced by low-birthweight and preterm babies
are even more pronounced in very-low-birthweight infants, with astonishing financial con-
sequences. A 4-month stay in an incubator in an intensive care unit can run into hundreds of
thousands of dollars, and about half of these newborns ultimately die, despite massive medi-
cal intervention (Taylor et al., 2000).
Even if a very-low-birthweight preterm infant survives, the medical costs can continue to
mount. For instance, one estimate suggests that the average monthly cost of medical care for
such infants during the first three years of life may be between 3 and 50 times higher than the
medical costs for a full-term child. Such astronomical costs have raised ethical debates about
the expenditure of substantial financial and human resources in cases in which a positive out-
come may be unlikely (Prince, 2000; Doyle, 2004; Petrou, 2006).
As medical capabilities progress and developmental researchers come up with new strate-
gies for dealing with preterm infants and improving their lives, the age of viability is likely to
be pushed even earlier. Emerging evidence suggests that high-quality care can provide protec-
tion from some of the risks associated with prematurity, and that in fact by the time they reach
adulthood, premature babies may be little different from other adults (Hack et al., 2002).
Research also shows that preterm infants who receive more responsive, stimulating, and
organized care are apt to show more positive outcomes than those children whose care is not as
good. Some of these interventions are quite simple. For example, “Kangaroo Care” in which
infants are held skin-to-skin against their parents’ chests appears to be effective in helping
preterm infants develop. Massaging preterm infants several times a day triggers the release
of hormones that promote weight gain, muscle development, and abilities to cope with stress
­(Erlandsson et al., 2007; Field et al., 2008; Blomqvist & Nyqvist, 2011; Feldman, 2011).


Postmature Babies: Too Late, Too Large
One might imagine that a baby who spends extra time in the womb might have some ­advantages,
given the opportunity to continue growth undisturbed by the outside world. Yet postmature
­infants—those still unborn two weeks after the mother’s due date—face several risks.
For example, the blood supply from the placenta may become insufficient to nourish the
still-growing fetus adequately. Consequently, the blood supply to the brain may be decreased,
leading to the potential of brain damage. Similarly, labor becomes riskier (for both the child
and the mother) as a fetus who may be equivalent in size to a one-month-old infant has to
make its way through the birth canal (Shea, Wilcox, & Little, 1998; Fok, 2006).
Difficulties involving postmature infants are more easily prevented than those involving
preterm babies, since medical practitioners can induce labor artificially if the pregnancy con-
tinues too long. Not only can certain drugs bring on labor, but physicians also have the option
of performing Cesarean deliveries, a form of delivery we consider next.
