Spend 24 hours with even a very young infant
and you will hear a variety of sounds: cooing, crying, gurgling, murmuring, and many other
noises. These sounds, although not meaningful in themselves, play an important role in lin-
guistic development, paving the way for true language (O’Grady & Aitchison, 2005).
Prelinguistic communication is communication through sounds, facial expressions,
gestures, imitation, and other nonlinguistic means. When a father responds to his daughter’s
“ah” with an “ah” of his own, and then the daughter repeats the sound, and the father responds
once again, they are engaged in prelinguistic communication. Clearly, the “ah” sound has no
particular meaning. However, its repetition, which mimics the give-and-take of conversation,
teaches the infant something about turn-taking and the back-and-forth of communication.

The most obvious manifestation of prelinguistic communication is babbling. Babbling,
making speechlike but meaningless sounds, starts at the age of 2 or 3 months and continues
until around the age of 1 year. When they babble, infants repeat the same vowel sound over
and over, changing the pitch from high to low (as in “ee-ee-ee,” repeated at different pitches).
After the age of 5 months, the sounds of babbling begin to expand, reflecting the addition of
consonants (such as “bee-bee-bee-bee”).
Babbling is a universal phenomenon, accomplished in the same way throughout all cultures.
While they are babbling, infants spontaneously produce all of the sounds found in every language,
not just the language they hear people around them speaking. In fact, as we discuss in the From
Research to Practice box on page 222, even deaf children display their own form of babbling.
Babbling typically follows a progression from simple to more complex sounds. Although
exposure to the sounds of a particular language does not seem to influence babbling initially,
eventually experience does make a difference. By the age of 6 months, babbling reflects the
sounds of the language to which infants are exposed. The difference is so noticeable that even
untrained listeners can distinguish among babbling infants raised in cultures in which French,
Arabic, or Cantonese languages are spoken. Furthermore, the speed at which infants begin
homing in on their own language is related to the speed of later language development (Tsao,
Liu, & Kuhl, 2004; Whalen, Levitt, & Goldstein, 2007).
There are other indications of prelinguistic speech. For instance, consider 5-month-old
Marta, who spies her red ball just beyond her reach. After reaching for it and finding that she
is unable to get to it, she makes a cry of anger that alerts her parents that something is amiss,
and her mother hands it to her. Communication has occurred.
Four months later, when Marta faces the same situation, she no longer bothers to reach
for the ball and doesn’t respond in anger. Instead, she holds out her arm in the direction of
the ball and, with great purpose, seeks to catch her mother’s eye. When her mother sees the
behavior, she knows just what Marta wants. Clearly, Marta’s communicative skills—although
still prelinguistic—have taken a leap forward.

Even these prelinguistic skills are supplanted in just a few months, when the gesture
gives way to a new communicative skill: producing an actual word. Marta’s parents clearly
hear her say “ball.”
